Home
Certification
AIGP: Artificial Intelligence Governance Professional
AIGP: Artificial Intelligence Governance Professional
Now that AI has made its debut, there is a need for professionals in all industries to understand and execute responsible AI governance. The AIGP credential demonstrates competency in AI development, the ability to conduct ethical AI deployment, and the ability to utilize best practices in AI management to ensure safety and trust.
Learn about AIGP training
Why pursue an AIGP designation?
Establish foundational knowledge of AI systems and their use cases, the impacts of AI, and comprehension of responsible AI principles.
Demonstrate an understanding of how current and emerging laws apply to AI systems, and how major frameworks are capable of being responsibly governed.
Show comprehension of the AI life cycle, the context in which AI risks are managed, and the implementation of responsible AI governance.
Presents awareness of unforeseen concerns with AI and knowledge of debated issues surrounding AI governance.
Buy the exam
Exam prep tools
Prepare for the exam with these free resources.
AIGP Body of Knowledge and Exam Blueprint
The AIGP Body of Knowledge and Exam Blueprint outlines all the concepts and topics that you need to know to become certified.
Learn more
[https://assets.contentstack.io/v3/assets/bltd4dd5b2d705252bc/blt0d33152fd20bc134/AIGP_Cert BOK.pdf]
AIGP study guide
Prepare with this downloadable guide that covers the exam format and offers sample questions.
Get the study guide
How to prepare for your exam
Planning and studying is essential for achieving certification. To help, the IAPP offers textbooks, flexible training options, self-assessment tests and more.
Start preparing today
Learn more about the certification process
Certification process
Steps to certify
Free study guides
Study at your own pace
Certification FAQs
Common questions
Certification candidate handbook
We strongly encourage all potential test takers to read our certification candidate handbook before testing for details on our testing policies and procedures.
Read the handbook
[https://assets.contentstack.io/v3/assets/bltd4dd5b2d705252bc/blteb8b5d531fd78971/IAPP-Certification_Handbook.pdf]
