About the ICO
ICO and stakeholder consultations
ICO consultation on the draft guidance about automated decision-making, including profiling
ICO consultation on the draft guidance about automated decision-making, including profiling
Start date
31 March 2026
Closing date
29 May 2026
Type
Stakeholder
Status
Closed
This consultation has closed
Overview
The Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) is consulting on draft guidance about automated decision-making, including profiling. This guidance serves as an update to existing guidance on automated decision-making and profiling.
The updates to our guidance follow the introduction of the Data (Use and Access) Act 2025. Your responses will help us provide any further clarity needed in the final guidance update.
The guidance focuses on the provisions specific to automated decision-making. It isn’t intended to cover every data protection concept and provides links to more information on our website. This guidance is aimed at data protection officers, compliance professionals, and technical leads with oversight of your organisation’s use or procurement of ADM systems. Despite this, we are happy to receive submissions from everyone, including members of the public.
In due course, we will also update the “in brief” guidance, which provides a shorter overview: Rights related to automated decision making including profiling, and guidance for the public: Your rights relating to decisions being made about you without human involvement.
Your responses will help us to improve our guidance and we welcome your feedback to the questions set out in this survey. They’re split into the following sections:
Section 1: About you
Section 2: About your organisation
Section 3: Your general views on our draft guidance
Section 4: Your specific views on our draft guidance
Section 5: Your experience
Section 6: Your views on the draft impact assessment
Section 7: Your views on the costs and benefits of the draft guidance to your organisation
Responding to the consultation
You can respond to the consultation by completing our online survey, available through Citizen Space.
You can also respond to the consultation by sharing your submission to [email protected].
The consultation will remain open until <time> (GMT) on 29 May 2026. We may not consider responses received after this deadline.
Privacy Statement
For this consultation, depending on your preference, we may publish in full the responses received from organisations or a summary of the responses. If we do publish any responses, we will remove email addresses and telephone numbers from these responses. Please do not share any information in your response which you would not be happy for us to make publicly available.
Should we receive an FOI request for your response we will always seek to consult with you for your views on the disclosure of this information before any decision is made. For more information about what we do with personal data please see our privacy notice, and the section on responding to our consultations and surveys.
Please note that we are using the platform Citizen Space to gather this information on our behalf. Citizen Space is provided by a UK supplier, Delib. You can read Delib's privacy policy here.
