Publications
NIST IR 8596
(Initial Preliminary Draft)
Cybersecurity Framework Profile for Artificial Intelligence (Cyber AI Profile): NIST Community Profile
Share to Facebook
Share to X
Share to LinkedIn
Share ia Email
Documentation
Topics
Date Published: December 16, 2025
Comments Due: January 30, 2026 (public comment period is CLOSED)
Email Questions to:
[email protected]
Planning Note (04/21/2026):
Learn more about our Spring 2026 Cyber AI Profile Virtual Working Sessions (April 28, May 5, and May 12, 2026)
Author(s)
Katerina Megas (NIST), Barbara Cuthill (NIST), Marissa Dotter (MITRE), Michael Garris (MITRE), Ishika Khemani (MITRE), Bronwyn Patrick (MITRE), Noah Schiro (MITRE), Julie Nethery Snyder (MITRE), Mohammad Zarei (MITRE)
Announcement
Draft for Public Comment
AI has become a driving force behind today’s technological development, transforming industries and redefining how society operates. Advancements in AI technology introduce both cybersecurity opportunities and challenges to organizations.
NIST’s preliminary draft Cyber AI Profile can help organizations strategically adopt AI while addressing and prioritizing cybersecurity risks stemming from its advancements.
The Cyber AI Profile addresses the following Focus Areas:
Securing AI System Components (Secure)
Conducting AI-Enabled Cyber Defense (Defend)
Thwarting AI-enabled Cyber Attacks (Thwart)
The profile is open for comments until January 30, 2026. Your feedback is crucial in shaping the next and final version of this publication.
NOTE: A call for patent claims is included in this draft. For additional information, see the Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) Patent Policy – Inclusion of Patents in ITL Publications.
January 2026 Event: Cyber AI Workshop #2
Save the date for a workshop on January 14, 2026 to discuss the Preliminary Draft of the Cyber AI Profile and hear updates regarding the SP 800-53 Control Overlays for Securing AI Systems (COSAiS). Details and registration information will be posted later this month.
Questions?
Email the team: [email protected]. To stay up to date on this Profile and follow its progress, we recommend joining the NCCoE Cyber AI Community of Interest (COI).
Abstract
The Cybersecurity Framework Profile for Artificial Intelligence (AI) Profile (“Cyber AI Profile” or “The Profile”) will provide guidelines for managing cybersecurity risk related to AI systems as well as identifying opportunities for using AI to enhance cybersecurity capabilities. The Profile is organized using the NIST Cybersecurity Framework 2.0 outcomes (Functions, Categories, and Subcategories). This Preliminary Draft is shared along with a request for public comment to solicit feedback on the planned direction and content. Comments received will inform the initial public draft. More information about this project, including a roadmap, is available on the National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE) Cyber AI Profile project page.
The Cybersecurity Framework Profile for Artificial Intelligence (AI) Profile (“Cyber AI Profile” or “The Profile”) will provide guidelines for managing cybersecurity risk related to AI systems as well as identifying opportunities for using AI to enhance cybersecurity capabilities. The Profile is...
See full abstract
The Cybersecurity Framework Profile for Artificial Intelligence (AI) Profile (“Cyber AI Profile” or “The Profile”) will provide guidelines for managing cybersecurity risk related to AI systems as well as identifying opportunities for using AI to enhance cybersecurity capabilities. The Profile is organized using the NIST Cybersecurity Framework 2.0 outcomes (Functions, Categories, and Subcategories). This Preliminary Draft is shared along with a request for public comment to solicit feedback on the planned direction and content. Comments received will inform the initial public draft. More information about this project, including a roadmap, is available on the National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE) Cyber AI Profile project page.
Hide full abstract
Keywords
artificial Intelligence; Community Profile; Cyber AI Profile; Cybersecurity Framework; risk management
Control Families
None selected
Documentation
Publication:
https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8596.iprd
Download URL
[https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2025/NIST.IR.8596.iprd.pdf]
Supplemental Material:
Cyber AI Profile project
Related NIST Publications:
IR 8578 [/pubs/ir/8578/final]
IR 8607 [/pubs/ir/8607/final]
Document History:
12/16/25: IR 8596 (Draft)
Topics
Security and Privacy
risk management
Technologies
artificial intelligence
Applications
cybersecurity framework
